# Project Synopsis

Urbanization leads to heavy metal pollution from sources such as stormwater runoff, antifouling paints, and industrial processes. This trend has been seen to be true in the Puget Sound in Washington State, where highly urbanized areas are leading to copper contaminants ending up in the ocean. Understanding the physiological effects copper has on marine organisms is of special importance to Washington State to inform commercial fisheries and conservation management. In this study, we used a model organism for commercially relevant crab species, _Hemigrapsus oregonensis,_ to experiment the physiological and behavioral processes effected when exposed to copper. 

Nine crabs were exposed to copper sulfate pentahydrate at a concentration of 25 mg/L Cu and nine were exposed to 167 mg/L Cu. Respiration data was collected using rezasurin assays and righting times were collected for each treatment and control group. For the rezasurin assays, flurorescence levels were collected every 30 minutes for 90 minutes for each group. Data was collected after one week of exposure, and then again after two weeks of exposure. Temperature, salinity, and pH was controlled across treatment and control groups. The high-concentration treatment group had a 75% mortality rate, and the low-concentration group had a 43% mortality rate. No control-group crabs died. Crabs exposed to copper were seen to have inhibited respiration rates compared to control groups. Low-concentration crabs had a 43.3% decrease in oxygen consumption, and high-concentration crabs had a 51.3% decrease. Copper-exposed crabs were also seen to have delayed righting times, especially in the higher-concentration treatment group. Most control-group crabs managed to right themsleves in under one-second, while several high-concentration group crabs took over 10 seconds.

Inhibited respiration could be due to copper's effects on the metabolic process, having seen to influence enzymes and metabolites incolved in the Krebs cycle, glycolysis, and the electron transport chain. Delays in righting times could be due to neurological effects of copper on crabs, or the copper's inhibition stimuli. It is also possible the decrease in respiration in the crabs prevented them from having the energy to right themselves.

This study highlights the importance in further research into copper's effects on marine organisms, especially those of commercial importance or conservation concern. It has already been seen that crabs in the Puget Sound have elevated copper levels. This study and future research should be used to guide legislation to prevent copper pollution from anthropogenic sources such as antifouling paints when possible.
